ACP-112 : Provable Virtual Machine Randomness (#113)
avalanche-foundation/ACPs: ACPs/113-provable-randomness/README.md

For proposers that do not have a BLS key associated with their node, the hash of the signature from the previous round.

In order to bootstrap the signatures chain, a missing signature would be replaced with a byte slice that is the hash product of a verifiable and trustable seed.

The changes proposed here would affect the way a block is being validated. Therefore, when this change gets implemented, it needs to be deployed as a hard fork.

### Changes Details

#### Step 1. Adding BLS signature to proposed blocks

```golang
type statelessUnsignedBlock struct {
	…
	signedParentBlockSig    []byte `serialize:”true”`
}
```

#### Step 2. Populate signature

When a block proposer attempts to build a new block, it would need to use the parent block as a reference.

Populating the `signedParentBlockSig` would following this logic:

1. The current proposer has a BLS key
   
	a. If the parent block has a valid `signedParentBlockSig` signature, that signature would be signed using the proposer’s BLS key.

> 	b. If the parent block does not have a valid `signedParentBlockSig` signature, the proposer would sign the bootStrappingBlockSignature with its BLS key ( see below )

Reviewer: We should clarify whether the hash of:

	```
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	|  prefix :               | [8]byte  | "rng-derv" |
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	|  signedParentBlockSig : | [48]byte |  48 bytes  |
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	```

constitutes a "valid `signedParentBlockSig` signature" since it isn't a signature, it's a hash.

Author: I replaced the wording of "valid" with empty/non-empty. I think it would better describe the usage.

2. The current proposer does not have a BLS key
   

>    a. If the parent block has a valid `signedParentBlockSig` signature, the proposer would set the signedParentBlockSig to the hash result of the following preimage:

Reviewer: Same as above -- what is the set of "valid" `signedParentBlockSig`?

Author: done

A solution for verifiable random number generation within Avalanche solves these problems. It provides fair randomness functionality across the chains, at no additional cost. This paves the way for a more efficient Avalanche ecosystem.

## Specification

### Changes Summary

Existing avalanche protocol breaks the block building into two parts : external and internal. The external block is the SnowMan++ block, whereas the internal block is the actual virtual machine block.

To support randomness, a BLS based VRF implementation is used, that would be recursively signing its own signatures as its message. Since the BLS signatures are deterministic, they provide a great way to construct a reliable VRF.

For proposers that do not have a BLS key associated with their node, the hash of the signature from the previous round.

In order to bootstrap the signatures chain, a missing signature would be replaced with a byte slice that is the hash product of a verifiable and trustable seed.

> The changes proposed here would affect the way a block is being validated. Therefore, when this change gets implemented, it needs to be deployed as a mandatory upgrade.

Reviewer 2: > it needs to be deployed as a mandatory upgrade.

Is this feature always activated, or would it be possible to opt-in to activate this feature via some kind of voting?
It might be that some subnet/L1 would prefer to not pay the extra overhead.

Author: A subnet would still be fully usable without having this feature active. From technical perspective, the subnet would need to be configured to set the activation time for this feature to infinity. I think that the technical aspects (how to enabled/disable) of this feature are a bit beyond the scope of this ACP.

		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+
		|  VRF-Sig(n)           |           |  VRF-Sig(n+1)         |
		|  ...                  |           |  ...                  |
		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+

		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+
		|  VM n                 |           |  VM n+1               |
		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+
		|  VRF-Out(n)           |           |  VRF-Out(n+1)         |
		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+

		VRF-Sig(n+1) = Sign(VRF-Sig(n), Block n+1 proposer's BLS key)
		VRF-Out(n) = Hash(VRF-Sig(n))
```

### Changes Details

#### Step 1. Adding BLS signature to proposed blocks

```golang
type statelessUnsignedBlock struct {
	…
	vrfSig    []byte `serialize:”true”`
}
```

#### Step 2. Populate signature

When a block proposer attempts to build a new block, it would need to use the parent block as a reference.

The `vrfSig` field within each block is going to be daisy-chained to the `vrfSig` field from it's parent block.

Populating the `vrfSig` would following this logic:

1. The current proposer has a BLS key
   

> 	a. If the parent block has an empty `vrfSig` signature, that signature would be signed using the proposer’s BLS key. This is the base case.

Reviewer 2: why sign the signature of the previous block and not sign the hash of the previous block?

Reviewer 2: If you sign the hash of the previous block instead, I think it makes this document more compact / succinct as no need to specify special conditions to whether the previous block has the VRF signature or not.

> 	b. If the parent block does not have an empty `vrfSig` signature, the proposer would sign the bootStrappingBlockSignature with its BLS key. See the bootStrappingBlockSignature details below.

Reviewer 3: Aren't these cases swapped? You bootstrap if the `vrfSig` *is* empty right? If its not then you just chain sign.

Author: correct. fixed.

> ```text

Reviewer 4: Would you mind updating the header to use the newly introduced table format?

https://github.com/avalanche-foundation/ACPs/blob/main/ACPs/TEMPLATE.md

Author: done.

ACP: 113
Title: Provable Virtual Machine Randomness
Author(s): Tsachi Herman <http://github.com/tsachiherman>
Discussions-To: <GitHub Discussion URL (POPULATED BY MAINTAINER, DO NOT SET)>
Status: Proposed
Track: Standards
Replaces (*optional): n/a
Superseded-By (*optional): n/a
```

## Abstract

Avalanche offers developers flexibility through subnets and EVM-compatible smart contracts. However, the platform's deterministic block execution limits the use of traditional random number generators within these contracts.

To address this, a mechanism is proposed to generate verifiable, non-cryptographic random number seeds on the Avalanche platform. This method ensures uniformity while allowing developers to build more versatile applications.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Author: done.

## Motivation

Reliable randomness is essential for building exciting applications on Avalanche. Games, participant selection, dynamic content, supply chain management, and decentralized services all rely on unpredictable outcomes to function fairly. Randomness also fuels functionalities like unique identifiers and simulations. Without a secure way to generate random numbers within smart contracts, Avalanche applications become limited.

Avalanche's traditional reliance on external oracles for randomness creates complexity and bottlenecks. These oracles inflate costs, hinder transaction speed, and are cumbersome to integrate. As Avalanche scales to more Subnets, this dependence on external systems becomes increasingly unsustainable.

A solution for verifiable random number generation within Avalanche solves these problems. It provides fair randomness functionality across the chains, at no additional cost. This paves the way for a more efficient Avalanche ecosystem.

## Specification

### Changes Summary

> Existing avalanche protocol breaks the block building into two parts : external and internal. The external block is the SnowMan++ block, whereas the internal block is the actual virtual machine block.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The existing Avalanche protocol breaks the block building into two parts : external and internal. The external block is the Snowman++ block, whereas the internal block is the actual virtual machine block.
```

Author: done.,

To support randomness, a BLS based VRF implementation is used, that would be recursively signing its own signatures as its message. Since the BLS signatures are deterministic, they provide a great way to construct a reliable VRF.

> For proposers that do not have a BLS key associated with their node, the hash of the signature from the previous round.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For proposers that do not have a BLS key associated with their node, the hash of the signature from the previous round is used in place of their signature.
```

Author: done.

In order to bootstrap the signatures chain, a missing signature would be replaced with a byte slice that is the hash product of a verifiable and trustable seed.

> The changes proposed here would affect the way a block is being validated. Therefore, when this change gets implemented, it needs to be deployed as a mandatory upgrade.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The changes proposed here would affect the way a blocks are validated. Therefore, when this change gets implemented, it needs to be deployed as a mandatory upgrade.
```

Author: done.

		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+
		|  VRF-Out(n)           |           |  VRF-Out(n+1)         |
		+-----------------------+           +-----------------------+

		VRF-Sig(n+1) = Sign(VRF-Sig(n), Block n+1 proposer's BLS key)
		VRF-Out(n) = Hash(VRF-Sig(n))
```

### Changes Details

#### Step 1. Adding BLS signature to proposed blocks

```golang
type statelessUnsignedBlock struct {
	…
	vrfSig    []byte `serialize:”true”`
}
```

#### Step 2. Populate signature

When a block proposer attempts to build a new block, it would need to use the parent block as a reference.

The `vrfSig` field within each block is going to be daisy-chained to the `vrfSig` field from it's parent block.

Populating the `vrfSig` would following this logic:

1. The current proposer has a BLS key
   
	a. If the parent block has an empty `vrfSig` signature, that signature would be signed using the proposer’s BLS key. This is the base case.

	b. If the parent block does not have an empty `vrfSig` signature, the proposer would sign the bootStrappingBlockSignature with its BLS key. See the bootStrappingBlockSignature details below.

2. The current proposer does not have a BLS key
   

>    a. If the parent block has a non empty `vrfSig` signature, the proposer would set the proposed block `vrfSig` to the 32 byte hash result of the following preimage:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   a. If the parent block has a non-empty `vrfSig` signature, the proposer would set the proposed block `vrfSig` to the 32 byte hash result of the following preimage:
```

Author: done.

	```
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	|  prefix :               | [8]byte  | "rng-derv" |
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	|  vrfSig :               | [96]byte |  96 bytes  |
	+-------------------------+----------+------------+
	```

	b. If the parent block has an empty `vrfSig` signature, the proposer would leave the field empty.

The bootStrappingBlockSignature that would be used above is the hash of the following preimage:

```
+-----------------------+----------+------------+
|  prefix :             | [8]byte  | "rng-root" |
+-----------------------+----------+------------+
|  chainID :            | [32]byte |  32 bytes  |
+-----------------------+----------+------------+

> |  networkID:           | uint32   |  4 bytes   |

Reviewer 4: Small nit: It may make more sense to put `networkID` before `chainID` here. Existing serializations (for Warp messages, P-Chain txs) that have those fields put them in that order to go from more general to more specific.

Author: makes sense.

Author: done

+-----------------------+----------+------------+
```

#### Step 3. Signature Verification

This signature verification would perform the exact opposite of what was done in step 2, and would verify the cryptographic correctness of the operation.

Validating the `vrfSig` would following this logic:
1. The proposer has a BLS key

> 	a. If the parent block had a non empty `vrfSig`, then a BLS signature verification of the proposed block  `vrfSig` would be made against the proposer’s BLS public key and the parent's block  `vrfSig` as the message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	a. If the parent block's `vrfSig` was non-empty , then the `vrfSig` in the proposed block is verified to be a valid BLS signature of the parent block's `vrfSig` value for the proposer's BLS public key.
```

Author: thanks. done.

> 	b. If the parent block does has an empty `vrfSig`, then a BLS signature verification of the proposed block `vrfSig` against the proposer’s BLS public key and bootStrappingBlockSignature would take place.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	b. If the parent block's `vrfSig` was empty, then a BLS signature verification of the proposed block `vrfSig` against the proposer’s BLS public key and bootStrappingBlockSignature would take place.
```

2. The proposer does not have a BLS key

	a. If the parent block had a non empty `vrfSig`, then the hash of the preimage ( as described above ) would be compared against the proposed `vrfSig`.

	b. If the parent block has an empty `vrfSig` then the proposer's `vrfSig` would be validated to be empty.

#### Step 4. Extract the VRF Out and pass to block builders

Calculating the VRF Out would be done by hashing the preimage of the following struct:

```
+-----------------------+----------+------------+
|  prefix :             | [8]byte  | "vrfout  " |
+-----------------------+----------+------------+
|  vrfout:              | [96]byte |  96 bytes  |
+-----------------------+----------+------------+
```

Before calculating the VRF Out, the method needs to explicitly check the case where the `vrfSig` is empty. In that case, the output of the VRF Out needs to be empty as well.

> ## Backwards Compatibility

Reviewer 4: You mentioned it above already, but I think the `Backwards Compatibility` section should also call out that these changes necessitate a required network upgrade.

Author: np.

Despite these limitations appearing severe, attackers face significant hurdles to exploit them. First, the attacker can't control the random number, limiting the attack's effectiveness to how that number is used. Second, a substantial amount of AVAX is needed. And last, such an attack would likely decrease AVAX's value, hurting the attacker financially.

One potential attack vector involves collusion among multiple proposers to manipulate the random number selection. These attackers could strategically choose to propose or abstain from proposing blocks, effectively introducing a bias into the system. By working together, they could potentially increase their chances of generating a random number favorable to their goals.

However, the effectiveness of this attack is significantly limited for the following reasons:
- Limited options: While colluding attackers expand their potential random number choices, the overall pool remains immense (2^32 possibilities). This drastically reduces their ability to target a specific value.

> - Protocol's countermeasure: The protocol automatically eliminates any bias introduced by previous proposals once an honest proposer submits their block.

Reviewer 4: Should we also note that the presence of any bias is detectable and could be exposed in VMs so that applications can choose whether or not to use the resulting random number generated (i.e. only allow its use if it had <= 1 bit bias).

Author: done.
